
# Datatypes
- bool (cs50)
- char (built-in)
- double (built-in)
- float (built-in)
- int (built-in)
- long (modifier)
- string (cs50)

## int
- `int` is used for variables that store **integers**
- Integers always take up **4 bytes** (32 bits) of memory.
- Meaning that the range of value that they can store is limited to 32 bits worth of information
- **Range of values** -> (-2^31) to (2^31 - 1)
- **Approx Range** -> (-2 billion) to (+2 billion)
- (-1) becoz we need a spot for 0

## unsigned int
- `unsigned` is a **qualifier** that can be applied to certain types which effectively **doubles** the positive range of variables of that type at the cost of disallowing any negative values.
- **Range of values** -> 0 to (2^32 - 1)
- **Approx Range** -> (0) to (+4 billion)

## char
- The `char` datatype is used for variables that wills store **single characters**
- Characters always take up **1 byte** (8 bits) of memory.
- Thanks to ASCII, we have developed a mapping of characters like A, B, C... to numeric values in the positive side of this range
- **Range of values** -> (-2^7) to (2^7 - 1)
- **Approx Range** -> (-128) to (+127)

## float
- The `float` datatype is used for variables that will store **floating-point** values, aka **real numbers**
- Floating point values always take up **4 bytes** (32 bits) of memory
- Here we **don't have a definitive range** of values.
- We can say that out of 32 bits, some will be used for the integer part and remaining will be used for the decimal part. Bigger the integer part, less precise the overall number will be since decimal part will get reduced.

## double
- `double` is same as `float`
- Difference is that `double` is **double precision**, They always take up **8 bytes** (64 bits) of memory.
- WIth additional 32 bits of precision, w.r.t `float`, `double` allows us to specify **much more precise numbers**.

## void
- This is **not a datatype**, its a **type**
- Functions can have a void return type, which just means that they don't return a value
- The parameter list of a function can also be void. It simply means the function takes no parameters.
- Think of `void` as a placeholder for "nothing"

# Data Type Modifiers In C 
- Modifiers are C keywords that **modify the meaning of fundamental data types** (int, float, char, double, void). 
- It indicates how much memory will be allocated to a variable. 
- Modifiers are prefixed with fundamental data types to adjust the memory allocated for a variable. 
- C Programming Language has four data type modifiers: `long, short, signed, unsigned`

# Format Codes
- **%s** -> string
- **%i** -> integer
- **%c** -> char
- **%f** -> float or double
- **%li** -> long integer

# What happens during compilation??
- Compilation is the process of converting sorce code to machine code.
- Four steps takes place when we "compile" our code

1) **Pre-processing** - All the statements starting with the # symbol in a C program are processed by the pre-processor, and it converts our program file into an intermediate file with no # statements. Some of the pre-processing tasks performed are : Comments removal, macros expansion, file inclusion, conditional compilation.
2) **Compiling** - Converts the pre-processed (.i) to assembly file (.s) containing assembly level instructions using an inbuilt compiler software.
3) **Assembling** - Assembly level code (.s file) is converted into a machine-understandable code (in binary/hexadecimal form) specific to the machine type known as the *object code* using an assembler. Assembler is a pre-written program that translates assembly code into machine code. The file generated has the same name as the assembly file and is known as an object file with an extension of .obj in DOS and .o in UNIX OS.
4) **Linking** - Linking is a process of including the library files into our program. Library Files are some predefined files that contain the definition of the functions in the machine language and these files have an extension of .lib. Some unknown statements are written in the object (.o/.obj) file that our operating system can't understand. You can understand this as a book having some words that you don't know, and you will use a dictionary to find the meaning of those words. Similarly, we use Library Files to give meaning to some unknown statements from our object file. The linking process generates an executable file with an extension of .exe in DOS and .out in UNIX OS.

# Command-line argumnets

- Why do we write "void" in int main? **void** in `int main(void)` means that the program can't take command line arguments.
- If in case we do want to accept command line arguments like taking user input, we can write something like this `int main(int argc, string argv[])`.
- `argc` which stands for **argument count** will store how many words the human typed at the prompt. The C automatically gives that to you.
- `argv` stands for **argument vector** will be an array of all of the words human entered at the prompt.

# Some search and sort Algorithms

## Linear Search Algorithm Psuedocode
- Repeat, starting at the first element:
  - If the first element is what you are looking for (the target), stop,
  - Otherwise, move to the next element
- Complexities :
  - O(n)
  - Omega(1)

## Binary Search Algorithm Psuedocode (divide and conquor)
** Pre-requisite is to have a sorted array
- Repeat until the (sub)array is of size 0:
  - Calculate the middle point of the (sub)array
  - If the target is at the middle, stop
  - Otherwise, if the target is less than what's at the middle, repeat, changing the end point to be just to the left of the middle
  - Otherwise, if the target is greater than what's at the middle, repeat, changing the start point to be just to the right of the middle
- Complexities :
  - O(log n)
  - Omega(1)

## Bubble Sort Algorithm psuedocode
** here the idea is to movie higher valued elements generally towards the right
- Set swap counter to a non-zero value like -1
- Repeat until swap-counter is 0:
  - Reset swap counter to 0
  - Look at each adjacent pair
    - If the two adjacent elements are not in order, swap them and add one to the swap counter
- Complexities :
  - O(n ^ 2)
  - Omega(n)

## Selection Sort Algorithm Psuedocode
** the idea is to find the smallest unsorted element and add it to the end of the sorted list
- Repeat until no unsorted elements remain:
  - Search the unsorted part of the data to find the smallest value
  - Swap the smallest found value with the first element of the unsorted part
- Complexities :
    - O(n ^ 2)
    - Omega(n ^ 2)

## Merge Sort Algorithm Psuedocode
** Idea is to sort smaller arrays and then combine those arrays together (merge them) in sorted order. Merge sort leverages something called recursion.
- sort the left half of the array (assuming n > 1)
- sort the right half of the array (assuming n > 1)
- merge the two halves together
- Complexities :
  - O(n log n)
  - Omega(n log n)

# Data Structures Summary
- Basically there are 4 different ways to store data: ***Arrays, Linked Lists, Hash Tables, Tries***
- There are even some variations on these (trees and heaps, quite similar to tries, stacks and queues quite similar to arrays or linked lists etc.) but this will generally cover what we are looking in C.

## Arrays
- Insertion is bad - lots of shifting to fit an element in the middle
- Deletion is bad - lots of shifting after removing an element
- Lookup is great - random access, constant time
- Relatively easy to sort
- Relatively small size-wise
- Stuck with a fixed size, no flexibility

## Linked lists
- Insertion is easy - just tack onto the first
- Deletion is easy - Once you find the element
- Lookup is bad - have to rely on linear search
- Relatively difficult to sort - unless you're willing to compromise on super-fast insertion and instead of sort as you construct
- Relatively small size-wise (not as small as arrays)

## Hash tables
- Insertion is a two-step process - hash, then add
- Deletion is easy - once you find the element
- Lokkup is on average better than with linked lists since the size of linked list will be drilled down to a smalled size
- Not an ideal data structure if sorting is the goal - just use an array
- Cant define the size but in general will be bigger than linked list and smaller than a trie

## Tries
- Insertion is complex - a lot of dynamic memory allocation, but gets easier as you go
- Deletion is easy - just free a node
- Lookup is fast - not quite as fast as an array, but almost
- Already sorted - sorts as you build in almost all situations
- Rapidly becomes huge, even with very little data present, not great if space is at a premium

# Structures
- Structures provide a way to unify several variables of different types into a single, new variable type which can be assigned its own type name.
- We use structures (structs) to group together elements of a variety of data types that have a logical connection
- Think of structure like a "super-variable".

```c
struct car
{
    int year;
    char model[10];
    char plate[7];
    int odometer;
    double engine_size;
}

// variable declaration
struct car mycar;

// field accessing
mycar.year = 2011;
strcpy(mycar.plate, "CS50");
mycar.odometer = 50505;

// variable declaration (way 2)
struct car *mycar = malloc(sizeof(struct car));

// field accessing (way 2.1)
(*mycar).year = 2011;
strcpy((*mycar).plate, "CS50");
(*mycar).odometer = 50505;

// field accessing (way 2.2)
mycar->year = 2011;
strcpy(mycar->plate, "CS50");
mycar->odometer = 50505;

```

- Once we have defined a structure, which we typically do in seperate .h files or atop our programs outside of any functions, we have effectively created a new type
- That means we can create variables of that type using the familiar syntax.
- We can also access the various fields (aka members) of the structure using the dot operator.